# Extreme Rainfall in Niamey
A repository with some of the scripts that were used to analyse rainfall in Niamey, Niger for my (dissertation)[https://github.com/LDMOJ4/extreme-rainfall-sahel/blob/main/Dissertation.pdf]. This includes some exploratory data analysis, maximum likelihood estimation to fit extreme value distributions and gamma distributions, and building a Markov chain of rainfall existence to simulate 100 years of rainfall.

## Project Abstract
This paper analyses the effectiveness of convection permitting and parameterisation models in replicating the dynamics of Sahelian storms in Niamey. It then uses future runs of those models to try to predict how the climate will change in the future. This is done by comparing the intensity, duration, and meteorological dynamics of rainfall events in model runs with observational datasets. The focus of this paper is on extreme precipitation events and their frequency and likelihood. Rainfall data for 100-year periods is simulated using discrete time Markov chainsto allow more accurate analysis of the return periods of extreme rainfall. It is hypothesized that an increase in global sea temperature, an expected result of global warming, will increase the likelihood and intensity of extreme rainfall events.

## Context
This project was completed in spring 2024 and includes all of the code to support my dissertation, please read the dissertation for full context. This was one of my first data science projects. The code is poorly annotated as it was not marked further and has lots of innefficiencies but it produced strong findings.
The code can't run independently as the source data is not accessible.

## Data
This analysis uses two climate models: The Met Office Unified Model Convection Permitting for Africa (CP4-A) and the R25-Africa Regional Model. The major difference between the two models is the resolution. The CP4 model as it is referred to in this paper has a resolution of 4.5km whereas the R25 model has a 25km resolution. The resolution determines how convection is modelled. The smaller resolution allows the CP4 model to be convection permitting, whereas the R25 model requires convection parametrisation. Data has been extracted from each model for two ten-year simulation runs, a current climate run and a future climate run. The current climate run for both models is programmed with the sea surface temperatures from Reynolds observational dataset (Reynolds et al., 2007), this run is supposed to simulate the climate from 1996 to 2006 . The future model simulation is based off an assumption made with high confidence by the Inter-governmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) that if we do not make active changes, the global temperature will warm by 3-6°C (Fitzpatrick et al., 2020b). Therefore, the future models have a blanket increase in sea surface temperature of 4°C to those in Reynolds et al. (2007). For this analysis, the model data is only retrieved for Niamey, Niger. To note when looking at results, the model treats all months as 30 days and consequently all years as 360 days.
